This out_results directory contains output files generated by various scripts that are essential for subsequent studies. The files within this directory are organized to facilitate access and use in further data analysis stages.

## Description of subfolders


### out_fingerprint
It includes a series of detailed plots and visualizations representing centered log-ratio (clr) abundance values for transcription factors (TFs), organized and filtered by specific matrix types such as MX, M0, M1, guidi, salazar, and stress. The PDF files within this folder offer various comparative and statistical analyses:

- Line plots to observe trends in clr abundances of TFs.
- Scatter plots that correlate abundances between different samples, such as those from Tara Oceans and human gut samples.
- Annotations of correlation coefficients and linear regression equations, providing clear statistical interpretation. 

### ´out_correlation´
It contains heatmaps, clustermaps, and networks of correlation between the variables involved in this study: TFs abundance matrices and environmental data collected by Tara.

### ´out_regressions´
It contains initial analysis on the regressions between TFs clr-abundance and environmental variables.

### ´out_initial_predictions´
It contains initial exploratory results aimed at investigating the capacity of transcription factors (TFs) to sense the environment

### ´out_xgb_models´
contains XGBoost classification models designed to classify various environmental variables using transcription factor (TF) abundances as predictors (matrix types MX, M0, etc.). The classifications include:

- polar / non polar | on surface samples
- Temperature (Low <=10°C, Mid 10-22°C, High >22°C) | on surface samples
- Province (Fremont et. al. 2022) | on surface samples
- Layer (Surface, DCM, Mesopelagic) | on non polar samples
- Layer2 (Epipelagic, Mesopelagic) | on non polar samples
- NO3 (Low <=7, High > 7) | on epipelagic-non polar samples
- CarbonExport Mean Flux at 150m (Low <=0.7, Mid 0.7-3, High >3) | on epipelagic-non polar samples
- NPP (Low <=275, Mid 275-540, High >540) | on epipelagic-non polar samples

The hyperparameters for the XGBoost models were optimized using a tree-based algorithm from the 'Hyperopt' library. A public-private dataset approach was employed for final validation. Classification reports are included in this folder.

### out_shap_values
It contains SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations) values computed for each transcription factor (TF) in the classification models mentioned above. These values are used to identify TFs that significantly impact the model predictions.

### ´out_reg_genes´
It contains lists of regulated genes for specific transcription factors (TFs). These TFs were identified based on SHAP values, a combination of SHAP values and most correlated TFs, or TFs correlated with specific environmental variables.

### Credits
The results presented in this folder are a collaborative effort made by the following researchers:

- **Iñaki Hojas**
  - **Email**: [ihojas92@gmail.com](mailto:ihojas92@gmail.com)

- **Nicolas Toro-Llanco**
  - **Email**: [ntoro@dim.uchile.cl](mailto:ntoro@dim.uchile.cl)
  - **GitHub**: [github.com/nico142857](https://github.com/nico142857)